Update variable fonts article (#3445)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/variable-fonts/index.md

authors:
  - mustafakurtuldu
  - thomassteiner
  - dcrossland
  - roeln
date: 2018-02-19
updated: 2020-08-17
hero: hero.jpg
tags:

>   - blog
>   - fonts
> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - blog
  - fonts
  - performance
  - ux
---
```

authors:
  - mustafakurtuldu
  - thomassteiner
  - dcrossland
  - roeln
date: 2018-02-19
updated: 2020-08-17
hero: hero.jpg
tags:
  - blog
  - fonts
---

In this article, we will look at what variable fonts are, the benefits they
offer, and how we can use them in our work. First, let's review how typography
works on the web, and what innovations variable fonts bring.

## Browser compatibility

As of May 2020 variable fonts are supported in most browsers. See
[Can I use variable fonts?](https://caniuse.com/#feat=variable-fonts)

> and [Fallbacks](#fallbacks-and-browser-support).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and [Fallbacks](#fallbacks).
```
We should just hardcode an explicit ID so that it stays stable over time

to use, or undesirable side-effects such as [FOIT and
FOUT.](https://www.zachleat.com/web/fout-vs-foit/)

Many font families offer a much wider range of styles, from Thin to Black
weights, narrow and wide widths, a variety of stylistic details, and even
size-specific designs (optimized for large or small text sizes.) Since you'd
have to load a new font file for every style (or combinations of styles), many
web developers choose not to use these capabilities, reducing the reading
experience of their users.

## Anatomy of a Variable Font

Variable fonts address these challenges, by packing styles into a single file.

This works by starting with a central or 'default' master style, usually the
'Regular'–an upright roman design with the most typical weight and width that is
most suitable for plain text. This is then connected to other style masters in a
continuous range, called an 'axis.' The most common axis is **Weight**, which
can connect the default style through to a Bold master style. Any individual
style can be located along an axis, and is called an 'instance' of the variable
font. Some instances are named by the font developer, for example Weight axis

> location 600 is called SemiBold.

Reviewer: @RoelN is there any other phrase we can use other than `master` here? My org is asking me to avoid that word because of it's political/historical connotations (master/slave)

Author: Done!

The variable font [Roboto Flex](https://github.com/TypeNetwork/Roboto-Flex)

> has three styles for its **Weight** axis. The Regular style is at the center,
> and two styles at the opposite ends of the axis, that are lighter and heavier.
> Between these, you can choose from 900 instances:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
has three styles for its **Weight** axis. The Regular style is at the center,
and there are two styles at the opposite ends of the axis, one lighter and
the other heavier. Between these, you can choose from 900 instances:
```

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="roboto-flex-aaaaaa.png" style="max-width: 100%;"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <img src="roboto-flex-aaaaaa.png"
```

  alt="The letter 'A' shown in different weights">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption w-figcaption--fullbleed">
    Above: Illustrated anatomy of the Weight axis for the typeface Roboto.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

> The font developer can offer a set of different axes, and because they all share
> the same default styles, you can combine them. Roboto has three styles in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The font developer can offer a set of different axes. You can combine them
because they all share the same default styles. Roboto has three styles in a
```

Width axis: the Regular is at the center of the axis, and two styles, narrower
and wider, are at each end. These provide all the widths of the Regular style,
and combine with the Weight axis to provide all the widths for every weight.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <video controls autoplay loop muted class="w-screenshot">

>     <source src="roboto-dance.mp4" type="video/mp4">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <source src="https://storage.googleapis.com/web-dev-assets/variable-fonts/roboto-dance.mp4" type="video/mp4">
```
@RoelN please delete `roboto-dance.mp4` from this PR

  </video>
  <figcaption>
    Roboto Flex in random combinations of Width and Weight
  </figcaption>
</figure>

This means there are thousands of styles! This may seem like massive overkill,
but the quality of the reading experience can be remarkably enhanced by this

> diversity of type styles. And, if it is without performance penalty, web

Reviewer: My question right now as your typical web developer is: what are these performance penalties and how do I watch out for them?

developers can use a few or as many styles as they wish–it's up to their design.

### Italics

The way that Italics are handled in variable fonts is interesting, as there are
two difference approaches. Typefaces like Helvetica or Roboto have interpolation
compatible contours, so their Roman and Italic styles can be interpolated
between and the **Slant** axis can be used to get from Roman to Italic.

Other typefaces (such as Garamond, Baskerville, or Bodoni) have Roman and Italic
glyph contours that are not interpolation compatible. For example, the contours
that typically define a Roman lowercase "n" do not match the contours used to
define an Italic lowercase "n". Instead of interpolating one contour to the
other, the **Italic** axis toggles from Roman to Italic contours.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="Amstelvar-Ital-axis.png"
  alt="Example of the Weight Axes for the typeface Amstelvar">

>   <figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
```
Need to keep our styling consistent, file a feature request with our engineering team if you want to change how captions are presented

    Amstelvar's "n" contours in Italic (12 point, regular weight, normal width),
    and in Roman. Image supplied by David Berlow, type designer and typographer
    at Font Bureau.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

After the switch to Italic, the axes available to the user should be the same as
those for the Roman, just as the character set should be the same.

A glyph substitution capability can also be seen for individual glyphs, and used
anywhere in the design space of a variable font. For example, a dollar sign
design with two vertical bars works best at larger point sizes, but at smaller
point sizes a design with only one bar is better. When we have fewer pixels for
rendering the glyph, a two bar design can become illegible. To combat this, much
like the Italic axis, a glyph substitution of one glyph for another can occur
along the **Optical Size** axis at a point decided by the type designer.

In summary, where the contours allow for it, type designers can create fonts
that interpolate between various styles in a multi-dimensional design space.
This gives you granular control over your typography, and a great deal of power.

> ## Axes Definitions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Axes definitions
```

available, Weight, but the ranges are different–Oswald has the same range as
before it was upgraded to be variable, 200 to 700, but Hepta Slab has an extreme
hairline weight at 1 that goes all the up to 900.

The five registered axes have 4-character lowercase tags that are used to
set their values in CSS:

<table class="responsive">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<th colspan="2">Axis names and CSS values</th>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
				Weight
			</td>
			<td>
				<code>wght</code>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
				Width
			</td>
			<td>
				<code>wdth</code>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
				Slant
			</td>
			<td>
				<code>slnt</code>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
				Optical Size
			</td>
			<td>
				<code>opsz</code>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
				Italics
			</td>
			<td>
				<code>ital</code>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

Since the font developer defines which axes are available in a variable font,
and which values they can have, it is essential to find out what each font
offers. The font's documentation should provide this, or you can inspect the
font using a tool like [Wakamai Fondue](https://wakamaifondue.com).

> ## Variable Fonts in CSS
> 
> ### Loading Variable Font Files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Variable fonts in CSS

### Loading variable font files
```

Variable fonts are loaded though the same `@font-face` mechanism as traditional
static web fonts, but with two new enhancements:

```css
@font-face {
	font-family: 'Roboto Flex';
	src: url('RobotoFlex-VF.woff2') format('woff2 supports variations'),
       url('RobotoFlex-VF.woff2') format('woff2-variations');
	font-weight: 100 1000;
	font-stretch: 25% 151%;
}
```

**1. Source Formats:** We don't want the browser to download the font if it
doesn't support variable fonts, so we add a `format` description: once in the
[future
format](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-fonts-4/#font-face-src-requirement-types)
(`woff2 supports variations`), once in the current but soon to be deprecated
format (`woff2-variations`). If the browser supports variable fonts and supports
the upcoming syntax, it will use the first declaration. If it supports variable
fonts and the current syntax, it will use the second declaration. They both
point to the same font file.

> <!-- TODO 2021 Q1 revisit this, based on progress in https://www.w3.org/TR/css-fonts-4/#font-face-src-requirement-types to allow removing the 2nd src -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- TODO 2021 Q1 revisit this, based on progress in 
     https://www.w3.org/TR/css-fonts-4/#font-face-src-requirement-types
     to allow removing the 2nd src -->
```

**2. Style Ranges:** You'll notice we're supplying two values for `font-weight`
and `font-stretch`. Instead of telling the browser which specific weight this
font provides (for example `font-weight: 500;`), we now give it the **range** of
weights supported by the font. For Roboto Flex, the Weight axis ranges from 100
to 1000, and CSS directly maps the axis range to the `font-weight` style
property. By specifying the range in `@font-face`, any value outside this range
will be "capped" to the nearest valid value. The Width axis range is mapped in
the same way to the `font-stretch` property.

If you're using the Google Fonts API, this will all be taken care of. Not only
will the CSS contain the proper source formats and ranges, Google Fonts will
also send static fallback fonts in case variable fonts aren't supported.

> ### Using Weights and Widths

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using weights and widths
```

Currently, the axes you can reliably set from CSS are the `wght` axis through
`font-weight`, and the `wdth` axis through `font-stretch`.

Traditionally, you would set `font-weight` as a keyword (`light`, `bold`) or as
a numerical value between 100 and 900, in steps of 100. With variable fonts, you
can set any value within the font's Width range:

```css
.kinda-light {
  font-weight: 125;
}

.super-heavy {
  font-weight: 1000;
}
```

<figure class="w-figure">
  <video controls autoplay loop muted class="w-screenshot">

>     <source src="roboto-flex-weight.mp4" type="video/mp4">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <source src="https://storage.googleapis.com/web-dev-assets/variable-fonts/roboto-flex-weight.mp4" type="video/mp4">
```

  </video>

>   <figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
```

    Roboto Flex' Weight axis being changed from its minimum to its maximum.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Likewise, we can set `font-stretch` with keywords (`condensed`,
`ultra-expanded`) or with percentage values:

```css
.kinda-narrow {
  font-stretch: 33.3%;
}

.super-wide {
  font-stretch: 151%;
}
```

<figure class="w-figure">
  <video controls autoplay loop muted class="w-screenshot">

>     <source src="roboto-flex-width.mp4" type="video/mp4">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <source src="https://storage.googleapis.com/web-dev-assets/variable-fonts/roboto-flex-width.mp4" type="video/mp4">
```

  </video>

>   <figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
```

    Roboto Flex' Width axis being changed from its minimum to its maximum.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

> ### Using Italics and Obliques

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using italics and obliques
```

The `ital` axis is intended for fonts that contain both a regular style, and an
italic style. The axis is meant to be an on/off switch: value `0` is off and
will show the regular style, value `1` will show the italics. Unlike other axes,
there's no transition. A value of `0.5` won't give you "half italics".

The `slnt` axis is different from italics in that it's not a new _style_, but
just slants the regular style. By default its value is `0`, which means the
default upright letter shapes. Roboto Flex has a maximum slant of -10 degrees,
meaning the letters will lean to the right when going from 0 to -10.

It would be intuitive to set these axis through the `font-style` property, but
as of April 2020, how to exactly do this is [still being worked
out](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/3125). So for now, you should
treat these as custom axes, and set them through `font-variation-settings`:

```css
i, em, .italic {
	/* Should be font-style: italic; */
	font-variation-settings: 'ital' 1;
}

.slanted {
	/* Should be font-style: oblique 10deg; */
	font-variation-settings: 'slnt' 10;
}
```

<figure class="w-figure">
  <video controls autoplay loop muted class="w-screenshot">

>     <source src="roboto-flex-slant.mp4" type="video/mp4">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <source src="https://storage.googleapis.com/web-dev-assets/variable-fonts/roboto-flex-slant.mp4" type="video/mp4">
```

  </video>

>   <figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
```

    Roboto Flex' Slant axis being changed from its minimum to its maximum.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

> ### Using Optical Sizes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using optical sizes
```

A typeface can be rendered very small (a 12px footnote) or very large (a 80px
headline). Fonts can respond to these size changes by changing its letter shapes
to better suit its size. A small size might be better off without fine details,
while a large size might benefit from more details and thinner strokes.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="roboto-flex-opsz.png"

Reviewer: Please resize to `1600px` width and lightly optimize with https://squoosh.app

  alt="The letter 'a' shown at different optical sizes">

>   <figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
```

    The letter 'a' in Roboto Flex at different pixel sizes, then scaled to be the same size,
    shows the differences in design.
    <a href="https://codepen.io/RoelN/pen/PoPvdeV">Try it yourself on Codepen</a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

A new CSS property has been introduced for this axis: `font-optical-sizing`. By
default it's set to `auto`, which makes the browser set the axis value based on
the `font-size`. This means the browser will pick the best optical size
automatically, but if you wish to turn this off you can set
`font-optical-sizing` to `none`.

You can also set a custom value for the `opsz` axis, if you deliberately want an
optical size that doesn't match the font size. The following CSS would cause
text to be displayed at a large size, but at an optical size as if it were
printed in `8pt`:

```css
.small-yet-large {
  font-size: 100px;
  font-variation-settings: 'opsz' 8;
}
```

> ### Using Custom Axes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using custom axes
```

Unlike registered axes, custom axes will not be mapped to an existing CSS
property, so you will always have to set them through `font-variation-settings`.
Tags for custom axes are always in uppercase, to distinguish them from
registered axes.

Roboto Flex offers a few custom axes, and the most important is Grade (`GRAD`).
A Grade axis is interesting as it changes the weight of the font without
changing the widths, so line breaks do not change. By playing with a Grade axis,
you can avoid being forced to fiddle with changes to Weight axis that affects
the overall width, and then changes to the Width axis that affect the overall
weight.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <video controls autoplay loop muted class="w-screenshot">

>     <source src="roboto-flex-grade.mp4" type="video/mp4">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <source src="https://storage.googleapis.com/web-dev-assets/variable-fonts/roboto-flex-grade.mp4" type="video/mp4">
```

  </video>

>   <figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
```

    Roboto Flex' Grade axis being changed from its minimum to its maximum.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

As `GRAD` is a custom axis, with a range of -1 to 1, we need to address it with
`font-variation-settings`:

```css
.grade-light {
	font-variation-settings: `GRAD` -1;
}

.grade-normal {
	font-variation-settings: `GRAD` 0;
}

.grade-heavy {
	font-variation-settings: `GRAD` 1;
}
```

> ## Font-variation-settings Inheritance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Font-variation-settings inheritance
```

Previously set values aren't inherited! This means the following will not work
as expected:

```html
<span class="slanted grade-light">
	I should be slanted and have a light grade
</span>
```

First the browser will apply `font-variation-settings: 'slnt' 10` from the
`.slanted` class. Then it will apply `font-variation-settings: 'GRAD' -1` from
the `.grade-light` class. But this will reset the `slnt` back to its default of
0! The result will be text in a light grade, but not slanted.

Luckily, we can work around this by using CSS variables:

```css
/* Set the default values */
:root {
	--slnt: 0;
	--GRAD: 0;
}

/* Change value for these elements and their children */
.slanted {
	--slnt: 10;
}

.grade-light {
	--grad: -1;
}

.grade-normal {
	--grad: 0;
}

.grade-heavy {
	--grad: 1;
}

/* Apply whatever value is kept in the CSS variables */
.slanted,
.grade-light,
.grade-normal,
.grade-heavy {
	font-variation-settings: 'slnt' var(--slnt), 'GRAD' var(--GRAD);
}
```

CSS variables will cascade, so if an element (or one of its parents) will have
set the `slnt` to `10`, it will keep that value, even if you set `GRAD` to

> something else. See [this
> post](https://pixelambacht.nl/2019/fixing-variable-font-inheritance/) for an
> in-depth explanation of this technique.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
something else. See
[Fixing variable font inheritance](https://pixelambacht.nl/2019/fixing-variable-font-inheritance/)
for an in-depth explanation of this technique.
```

Note that animating CSS variables doesn't work (by design), so something like
this doesn't work:

```css
@keyframes width-animation {
   from { --wdth: 25; }
   to   { --wdth: 151; }
}
```

These animations will have to happen directly on `font-variation-settings`.

> ## Performance Gains

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Performance gains
```

OpenType variable fonts allow us to store multiple variations of a type family
into a single font file.
[Monotype](https://medium.com/@monotype/part-2-from-truetype-gx-to-variable-fonts-4c28b16997c3)
ran an experiment by combining 12 input fonts to generate eight weights, across
three widths, across both the Italic and Roman styles. Storing 48 individual
fonts in a single variable font file meant a _88% reduction in file size_.

On the flip side, if you are animating the font between settings, this may cause

> the browser performance issues. Learn more about this on [Surma's
> Supercharged](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B42rUMdcB7c).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the browser performance issues. Learn more about this in
[Variable Fonts - Supercharged](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B42rUMdcB7c).
```

With variable fonts, app and website makers can offer really rich typography
experiences that express each brand, without the previous bandwidth and latency
costs. However, if you are using a single font such as Roboto Regular and
nothing else, you might see a net gain in font size if you were to switch to a
variable font with many axes. As always, it depends on your use-case.

Speaking of performance: if you're using Google Fonts, it's a good idea to

> preconnect to `https://fonts.gstatic.com`, the domain where Google's fonts are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[preconnect](/preconnect-and-dns-prefetch/) to `https://fonts.gstatic.com`,
the domain where Google's fonts are
```

hosted. This will make sure the browser knows early on where to get the fonts
when it comes across them in the CSS:

```html
<link rel="preconnect" href="https://fonts.gstatic.com" crossorigin />
```

> Find more performance tips for loading Google Fonts in [Harry Roberts'
> post](https://csswizardry.com/2020/05/the-fastest-google-fonts/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Find more performance tips for loading Google Fonts in [The Fastest
Google Fonts](https://csswizardry.com/2020/05/the-fastest-google-fonts/).
```

> ## Fallbacks and Browser Support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Fallbacks and browser support {: #fallbacks }
```

All modern browsers [support variable
fonts](https://caniuse.com/#feat=variable-fonts). In case you need to support
older browsers, you can choose to build your site with static fonts, and use
variable fonts as progessive enhancement:

```css
/* Set up Roboto for old browsers, only regular + bold */
@font-face {
  font-family: Roboto;
  src: url('Roboto-Regular.woff2');
  font-weight: normal;
}

@font-face {
  font-family: Roboto;
  src: url('Roboto-Bold.woff2');
  font-weight: bold;
}

> body {
> 	font-family: Roboto;
> }
> 
> .super-bold {
> 	font-weight: bold;
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
body {
  font-family: Roboto;
}

.super-bold {
  font-weight: bold;
}
```

/* Set up Roboto for modern browsers, all weights */
@supports (font-variation-settings: normal) {
  @font-face {
    font-family: 'Roboto';
    src: url('RobotoFlex-VF.woff2') format('woff2 supports variations'),
         url('RobotoFlex-VF.woff2') format('woff2-variations');
    font-weight: 100 1000;
    font-stretch: 25% 151%;
  }

  .super-bold {

> 	font-weight: 1000;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    font-weight: 1000;
```

  }
}
```

For older browsers, text with the class `.super-bold` will get rendered in the
normal bold, as that's the only bold font we have available. When variable fonts
are supported, we can actually use the heaviest weight of 1000.

If you are using the Google Fonts API, it will take care of loading the proper
fonts for your visitor's browsers. Say you request the font Oswald in weight
range 200 to 700, like so:

```html
<link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css2?family=Oswald:wght@200..700&display=swap" rel="stylesheet">
```

Modern browsers that can handle variable fonts will get the variable font, and
will have every weight between 200 and 700 available. Older browsers will get
served individual static fonts for every weight. In this case, this means
they'll download 6 font files: one for weight 200, one for weight 300, and so
on.

> ## Use Cases and Benefits

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use cases and benefits
```

Setting the axes values comes down to personal taste and applying typographic
best practices. The danger with any new technology is possible misuse, and
settings that are overly artistic or exploratory could also decrease legibility
of the actual text. For titles, exploring different axes to create great
artistic designs are exciting, but for body copy this risks making the text
illegible.

> ### Exciting Expression

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Exciting expression
```

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="grass-mandy.png"
  alt="Grass example by Mandy Michael">
</figure>

> One great example of artistic expression is shown above, an explorations of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One great example of artistic expression is shown above, an exploration of the
```

typeface
[Decovar](https://www.typenetwork.com/brochure/decovar-a-decorative-variable-font-by-david-berlow)
by Mandy Michael.

You can view the working example and source code for the above sample
[here](https://codepen.io/mandymichael/pen/YYaWop).

### Animation

<figure class="w-figure">
  <video controls autoplay loop muted class="w-screenshot">

>     <source src="axis-praxis.mp4" type="video/mp4">
>   </video>
>   <figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <source src="https://storage.googleapis.com/web-dev-assets/variable-fonts/axis-praxis.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
```

    Typeface Zycon, designed for animation by David Berlow, type designer and
    typographer at Font Bureau.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

There is also a possibility to explore animating characters with variable fonts.
Above is an example of different axes being used with the typeface Zycon. See
the live [animation example on Axis
Praxis](https://www.axis-praxis.org/specimens/zycon).

> [Anicons](https://typogram.github.io/Anicons) is the world's first animated
> [color icon font, based on Material Design Icons. Anicons is an experiment that
> [combines two cutting edge font technologies: variable fonts and color fonts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Anicons](https://typogram.github.io/Anicons) is the world's first animated
color icon font, based on Material Design Icons. Anicons is an experiment that
combines two cutting edge font technologies: variable fonts and color fonts.
```

<figure class="w-figure">
  <video controls autoplay loop muted class="w-screenshot">

>     <source src="anicons-animation.mp4" type="video/mp4">
>   </video>
>   <figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <source src="https://storage.googleapis.com/web-dev-assets/variable-fonts/anicons-animation.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
```

    A few examples of hover animations from Anicon's color icon font
  </figcaption>
</figure>

### Finesse

<figure class="w-figure">
  <video controls autoplay loop muted class="w-screenshot">

>     <source src="larger-widths.mp4" type="video/mp4">
>   </video>
>   <figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <source src="https://storage.googleapis.com/web-dev-assets/variable-fonts/larger-widths.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
```

>     Amstelvar using little bits of XTRA in opposite directions so the words widhts are evened out

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Amstelvar using little bits of XTRA in opposite directions so the words' widths are evened out
```

  </figcaption>
</figure>

Roboto Flex and Amstelvar offer a set of "Parametric Axes." In these axes, the
letters are deconstructed into 4 fundamental aspects of form: black or
positive shapes, white or negative shapes, and the x and y dimensions. In the
same way that primary colors can be blended with any other color to adjust it,
these 4 aspects can be used to fine tune any other axis.

The XTRA axis in Amstelvar allows you to adjust the "white" per mille value,

> as shown above. Using little bits of XTRA in opposite directions, the words
> widhts are evened out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as shown above. Using little bits of XTRA in opposite directions, the words'
widths are evened out.
```

> ## Thanks {: .hide-from-toc }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Thanks
```

  - mustafakurtuldu

>   - thomassteiner

Author: Added @davelab6 and myself in e5a4bff2235222a401d2cd374eaa2ea04c5393bd :-)

date: 2018-02-19
updated: 2020-08-05
hero: hero.jpg
tags:
  - blog
  - fonts
---
<!--

TODO add these to "authors" in yaml ↑
{ % include "web/_shared/contributors/dcrossland.html" %}
{ % include "web/_shared/contributors/roeln.html" %}

-->

In this article, we will look at what variable fonts are, the benefits they
offer, and how we can use them in our work. First, let's review how typography

> works on the web, and what innovations variable fonts bring.

Reviewer: Please put the browser compatibility data back in. We know from the [MDN DNA survey](https://mdn-web-dna.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/MDN-Web-DNA-Report-2019.pdf) (page 19) that browser compatibility is a top concern for web developers. We put it at the top of articles to convince developers that the rest of the content is worth their time (it's very frustrating to read a guide only to find out at the end that an API is only supported in Chrome).

## Introduction

The terms font and typeface are often used interchangeably by developers.
However there is a difference: A typeface is the underlying visual design that
can exist in many different typesetting technologies, and a font is one of these
implementations, in a digital file format. In other words, a typeface is what
you _see_, and the font is what you _use_.

Another concept that is often overlooked is the distinction between a style, and
a family. A style is a single and specific typeface, such as Bold Italic, and a
family is the complete set of styles.

Before variable fonts, each style was implemented as a separate font file. With
variable fonts, all styles can be contained in a single file.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="roboto-family-specimen.png" style="max-width: 100%;" alt="A specimen composition and list of different styles of the Roboto family">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption w-figcaption--fullbleed">

>     Above: Left, a specimen of the Roboto typeface family. Right, named styles within the family.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Left: a specimen of the Roboto typeface family. Right: named styles within the family.
```
I don't think `Above` is necessary because it's pretty clearly styled as the caption for the image

  </figcaption>
</figure>

> ## Challenges for the Designer and Developer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Challenges for the designer and developer
```
https://developers.google.com/style/capitalization#capitalization-in-titles-and-headings

<!--
RN: Are we still doing print industry references in 2020? How many web developers would relate to that in an article called "Introduction to variable fonts on the web"?

Cut to the chase?

Unlike books or magazines, which can have as many fonts on a page as they like, a website will have to download every single font it uses. This has been a sticking point for richer typographic experiences, as each font comes at a cost.

With traditional web fonts... etc.

> -->

Reviewer: Have you resolved these comments? Please delete if so.

When a designer creates a print project they face some constraints, such as the

> physical size of the page layout, the number of colors they can use is
> determined by the kind of printing press that will be used, and so on. But they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
physical size of the page layout, the number of colors they can use (which is
determined by the kind of printing press that will be used), and so on. But they
```

can use as many typeface styles as they like. This means that the typography of
print media is often rich and sophisticated, so that the reading experience is
truly delightful. Think of the last time you enjoyed browsing an excellent
magazine.

Web designers and developers have different constraints than print designers,
and an important one is the associated bandwidth costs of our designs. This has
been a sticking point for richer typographic experiences, as they come at a
cost. With traditional web fonts, each style used in our designs requires users
to download a separate font file, which increases latency and page rendering
time. Only including the Regular and Bold styles, plus their italic

> counterparts, can amount to 500k or more of font data. This is even before we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
counterparts, can amount to 500 KB or more of font data. This is even before we
```
I can't find a reference in style guide but I'm pretty sure we use KB for kilobytes and Kb for kilobits

> have dealt how the fonts are rendered, and the fallback or delayed-loading

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have dealt with how the fonts are rendered, and the fallback or delayed-loading
```

> patterns we are going to use (such as ["FOIT" and
> "FOUT."](https://www.zachleat.com/web/fout-vs-foit/))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
patterns we are going to use (such as [FOIT and
FOUT](https://www.zachleat.com/web/fout-vs-foit/)).
```
FOIT and FOUT aren't delayed-loading patterns, are they? They're more like undesirable unintended side effects? `delayed-loading patterns` sounds like something we do intentionally.

Many font families offer a much wider range of styles, from Thin to Black
weights, narrow and wide widths, a variety of stylistic details, and even
size-specific designs (optimized for large or small text sizes.) <!-- RN:
sentence below makes it sound the previous sentence lists "few capabilities"?
Maybe something like: "Since you'd have to load a new font file for every style
(or combinations of styles), many web developers choose not to use these

> capabilities, reducing the reading experience of their users." --> When using so

Reviewer: Are you going to resolve this comment?
